Two node (#5595)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/clusters/edge/architecture/two-node.md

---
sidebar_label: "Two-Node Architecture"
title: "Two-Node Architecture"
description: "Learn about Palette Edge and the architecture used to support two-node edge clusters."
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 0
tags: ["edge", "architecture"]
---

Palette Edge allows you to provision a highly available (HA) cluster capable of withstanding any single node failure

> with only two nodes instead of three. Palette achieves this by sidestepping a critical limitation of etcd and Postgres
> as the backend storage through [Kine](https://github.com/k3s-io/kine).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with only two nodes instead of three. Palette achieves this by sidestepping a critical limitation of etcd and Postgres
as the backend storage by using [Kine](https://github.com/k3s-io/kine).
```

Reviewer: Maybe?

> Palette Edge allows you to provision a highly available (HA) cluster capable of withstanding any single node failure
> with only two nodes instead of three. Palette achieves this by sidestepping a critical limitation of etcd and Postgres
> as the backend storage through [Kine](https://github.com/k3s-io/kine).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Palette Edge allows you to provision a highly available (HA) cluster capable of resisting any single node failure
with only two nodes, instead of the typical three. Palette achieves this by bypassing a critical limitation of etcd and Postgres
as the backend storage through [Kine](https://github.com/k3s-io/kine).
```
nothing wrong with the paragraph, just added a suggestion :)

:::preview

:::

## Architecture Overview

> In a typical Kubernetes cluster, a cluster achieves high availability through the backend key-value store etcd. When a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a typical Kubernetes cluster, a cluster achieves high availability through the backend key-value store [etcd](https://etcd.io/). When a
```

single node goes down, etcd is able to maintain data consistency since its two remaining node can still maintain quorum.
However, this setup requires at least three nodes. A two-node etcd cluster will not be able to withstand the failure of
a node because even the failure of one node will cause the cluster to lose quorum.

In our two-node HA architecture, instead of etcd, we use a Postgres database as the backend storage and a etcd shim
named Kine that allows the Kubernetes API to communicate with it as if it is an etcd server. One node is the leader and
the other node is the follower. The leader will process write requests and replicate the changes to the follower node.
Each node has a liveness probe that periodically probes the other node. When a node goes down, the other node's liveness
probe will stop receiving responses and the surviving node will remain the leader or be promoted to become the leader.

![Architectural diagram of a two-node architecture](/clusters_edge_architecture_two-node-diagram.webp)

To create a two-node Edge clusters, ensure you set the `TWO_NODE` argument to `true` during EdgeForge when building

> provider images, and toggle on **Two-Node Mode** in during Edge cluster creation. For more information, refer to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provider images, and toggle on **Two-Node Mode** during Edge cluster creation. For more information, refer to
```

[Build Provider Images](../edgeforge-workflow/palette-canvos/build-provider-images.md) and
[Create Cluster Definition](../site-deployment/cluster-deployment.md). If you create a two-node cluster, you must use

> exactly two nodes in the control plane, and will not be able to change it to a regular etcd-backed cluster or change the
> number of nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exactly two nodes in the control plane. You will also not be able to change it to a regular etcd-backed cluster or change the
number of nodes.
```

Reviewer: This is minor, more of a preference.

## Limitations

- Two-node clusters can only be deployed in connected mode. You cannot deploy hosts in airgap mode.
- Agent mode is not supported for two-node clusters because two-node high availability relies on Kairos, which is only
  used in appliance mode. For more information, refer to
  [Deployment Modes](../../../deployment-modes/deployment-modes.md).
- Two-node clusters can only have two nodes in the control plane pool. You cannot adjust the number of the nodes in the
  control plane pool after cluster creation.

## Use Cases

The two-node architecture prioritizes availability, but does make a slight sacrifice in data consistency in a
split-brain scenario. This architecture is most suitable in situations where the priority for availability is high, the
risk for network split is low, and a slight loss in a split-brain scenario is acceptable when compared with total

> availability loss. When these conditions are met, adopting the two-node architecture allows you to save 33% of costs on

Reviewer 2: how was this calculated :joy:

Reviewer 3: The cost of a third node?

- Automated inventory systems in retail and distribution warehouses.

## Leader Promotion After Node Failure

When the leader node of a two-node cluster fails, the liveness probe on the follower node will stop returning healthy
results. Once there are enough unhealthy responses, the follower node will initiate the promotion process to promote
itself as the leader. During this time, the different Kubernetes components become temporarily unavailable. The liveness
probe would make adjustments to the instance of Kine on the node so that its requests are now directed to the new leader
node's own instance of Postgres. The probe also performs a few SQL commands on the Postgres table to make sure that it
is ready for when the cluster comes back online.

![Architectural diagram of a two-node cluster when the leader node goes down](/clusters_edge_architecture_two-node-failover.webp)

Once all adjustments have been made, the Kubernetes cluster will come back online and start processing requests.

## Restore High Availability

When you re-introduce another node to your now one-node cluster to restore high availability, the cluster behavior is

> different depending on the timestamp of the most recent state changes in the two nodes. The node with the more recently
> timestamped state change will become the leader

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
different depending on the timestamp of the most recent state changes in the two nodes. The node with the most recently
timestamped state change will become the leader.
```

### Restore After Failure

> If you introduce a node that had previously failed, the previously failed node will drop its database in its entirety

Reviewer 3: This could lead to data loss no?

Author: This instance doesn't lead to data loss because nothing was ever written to the failed node that is not on the surviving node. The only instance of data loss is in a split-brain scenario.

and sync with the current leader as a follower, because the node does not have a more recently timestamped state change
compared with the current leader node. If you introduce a new node that was never part of the cluster, it will also sync
with the current leader and become a follower.

### Restore After Network Split

If a network split occurs, both nodes will assume the other node has experienced failure and start operating as the new
leader. When you re-introduce both nodes to the same cluster, the nodes will compare the timestamp of their most recent
state change. The node with the most recent state change is elected leader, and the losing node will drop its entire

> database to sync with the leader node as a follower. This may incur a small amount of data loss as the data that was
> written to the losing node during the split are not retained.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
database to sync with the leader node as a follower. This may incur a small amount of data loss, as the data  written to the losing node during the split is not retained.
```

> written to the losing node during the split are not retained.

Reviewer 3: This needs to be in a warning box
